RFC30: Ensure that index is less than length in input since field using epoch. (#223)
nervosnetwork/rfcs: rfcs/0030-ensure-index-less-than-length-in-since/0030-ensure-index-less-than-length-in-since.md

This RFC adds a new verification requirement on the transaction `since` field.

When an input `since` field is present, and the `metric_flag` is epoch (01), the `value` part is the encoded number `E + I / L`. No matter whether the relative flag is `relative` or `absolute`, the number is valid if and only if

- `I` is less than `L`, or
- `I` and `L` are both zero.

There are no changes to the rules in RFC17, except that **Absolute Epoch With Fraction Value Normalization** is no longer needed.

## Test Vectors

When `since` uses the absolute epoch `99 + 360 / 180`, and the current epoch is `100 + 0 / 180`, the transaction is mature using the old consensus rule but is invalid using the new rule.

## Deployment

The deployment can advance in two stages.

The first stage will activate the new consensus rule, starting from a specific epoch. The mainnet and testnet will use different starting epochs and all other chains will use the new rule from epoch 0.

The second stage is optional. After the new rule is active, and the blocks in the chain before activation can also pass the new consensus rule, the old rule is redundant and can be safely removed.

## Backward compatibility

> The new rule is striker than the old one, thus it can be deployed via a soft fork. When most nodes have upgraded to the new version, the old versions can keep up to date, although new version nodes may reject blocks generated by old versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new rule is stricter than the old one thus it can be deployed via a soft fork. When most mining nodes have upgraded to the new version, the old version full nodes can keep up to date. Blocks generated by old version mining nodes may be rejected by new version full nodes.
```

Author: Applied

---
Number: "0030"
Category: Consensus (Soft Fork)
Status: Draft
Author: Ian Yang
Organization: Nervos Foundation
Created: 2021-02-04
---

# Ensure That Index Is Less Than Length In the Input Since Field Using Epoch With Fraction

## Abstract

> This document proposes to fix a bug in the CKB reference implementation. When a transaction input uses the epoch with fraction in the `since` field, the `value` must ensure that the index is less than the length.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't personally say this is a bug in the `CKB reference implementation`. In Lina, a different implementation will also need to replicate this bug for the consensus rules to fully work. In this sense, I would argue this is a bug in the consensus rules, which is derived from the CKB reference implementation.

## Motivation

> The `value` part is an encoded number `epoch + index / length`. In CKB, every block is also assigned an epoch number with a fraction. If the block is the `I`th block in the epoch which epoch number is `E` and length is `L`, its epoch number with the fraction is `E + I / L` and `I` must be less than `L`. 

Reviewer 2: From here, it seems to me that `epoch, index and length`, `E, I and L` are all used to represent numbers encoded in `value`.

To verify that a transaction is mature since an absolute epoch number with a fraction, the current implementation assumes that `index` must be less than `length` and checks that:

```

> E > epoch

Reviewer 2: But here, it appears that `E` is used to represent the number encoded in `value`, but `epoch` is used as the actual epoch number for the current cell. I think it's better we clarity both set of terms upfront.

or (E == epoch and I / L >= index/length)
```

> This is not consistent when using relative flag in the `since` field, where the `value` is considered as a rational number and added to the cell start epoch.

Reviewer 2: Another point: up till this point, we have been talking about `value` in the block header part of CKB. If I understand this correctly, the consensus rule for this part is not changed. We are only changed the validation rule for a similar value used in `since` field represented as epoch number. My suggestion is to clarify this fact, clearly stating what is changed.

Right now what is happening here, is that we spend a huge deal of paragraph documenting what is not changed here, and only using a single sentence below this comment talking about what is changed.

> This document suggests adding a new rule to verify that when `since` uses epoch as the unit, it must ensure that index is less than the length.

Reviewer 2: I would recommend either of the following 2 types:

* We remove the above part where we were talking about validation rules in the block header part, where no rules are changed
* We include validation formulas for both the block header, and the since part in transaction input field

In both cases, I also recommend adding real examples since this is the motivation section, not the actual specification below.

> See RFC17 [Transaction valid since](../0017-tx-valid-since/0017-tx-valid-since.md) for details of the `since` field encoding patterns.

Reviewer 2: I suggest we move the link to the very top of this RFC, where we first talked about `value` in `since`. Without necessary information, the whole above section is quite confusing.

## Specification

### Since Absolute Epoch

When an input `since` field is present, and

* The `metric_flag` is epoch (01).
* The `relative_flag` is absolute (0).

> Providing that `value` is the encoded number `epoch + index / length`, the transaction is valid only if `index` is less than `length` or both `index` and `length` are zero \*.

Reviewer 2: I know this is probably the wrong time to ask for an implementation change, but just for completeness: what is the point of allowing both `index` and `length` as zero? Since this will be converted to `index` as 0 and `length` as 1, what prevents us from removing this rule, and allowing users to fill in `index` as 0, and any arbitrary positive number as `length`?

Author: This is also derived from the implementation. I keep it unchanged because it's common in some languages to memset the `since` field to zero and only set the epoch part.

> \* When both `index` and `length` are zero, `value` is converted to `epoch + 0 / 1`. 

If the current epoch number with the fraction is `E + I / L`, the transaction is considered mature when

```
E + I / L >= epoch + index / length
```

using rational number operations.

### Since Relative Epoch

When an input `since` field is present, and

* The `metric_flag` is epoch (01).
* The `relative_flag` is relative (1).

Providing that `value` is the encoded number `epoch + index / length`, the transaction is valid only if `index` is less than `length` or both `index` and `length` are zero \*.

> \* When both `index` and `length` are zero, `value` is converted to `epoch + 0 / 1`. 

If the cell creation epoch number with fraction is `e + i / l`, and the current epoch number with the fraction is `E + I / L`, the transaction is considered mature when

```
E + I / L >= e + i / l + epoch + index / length
```

using rational number operations.

## Test Vectors

> When `since` uses the absolute epoch `99 + 360 / 180`, and the current epoch is `100 + 0 / 180`, the transaction is mature using the old consensus rule but is immature using the new rule.

Reviewer 3: > but is immature using the new rule.

When using the new rule, it will causes [an error `InvalidSince`](https://github.com/nervosnetwork/ckb/blob/13c7a5bc64c8341655e169007aacfe6c15574707/verification/src/transaction_verifier.rs#L757).

Reviewer: I suggest making it clear the transaction is invalid not just immature under the new rule.

Author: My fault. There's two variants of the RFC. We normalize the number in the first version. Later we decide to disallow the malformed fraction number.

> When `since` uses the absolute epoch `99 + 360 / 180`, and the current epoch is `100 + 0 / 180`, the transaction is mature using the old consensus rule but is immature using the new rule.

Author: ```suggestion
When `since` uses the absolute epoch `99 + 360 / 180`, and the current epoch is `100 + 0 / 180`, the transaction is mature using the old consensus rule but is invalid using the new rule.
```

## Deployment

The deployment can be performed in two stages.

The first stage will activate the new consensus rule starting from a specific epoch. The mainnet and testnet will use different starting epochs and all other chains will use the new rule from epoch 0.

The second stage is optional. After the new rule has been activated, and the blocks in the chain before activation can also pass the new consensus rule, the old rule can be removed and all chains will use the new rule starting from the genesis block.

## Backward compatibility

> The new rule is striker than the old one thus it can be deployed via a soft fork. When most nodes have upgraded to the new version, the old versions can keep up to date although blocks generated by old versions may be rejected by new version nodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new rule is stricter than the old one thus it can be deployed via a soft fork. When most mining nodes have upgraded to the new version, the old version full nodes can keep up to date. Blocks generated by old version mining nodes may be rejected by new version full nodes. 
```
